Isha Upanishad - Ancient Indian Sacred Text

ॐ पूर्णमदः पूर्णमिदं पूर्णात्पूर्णमुदच्यते
पूर्णस्य पूर्णमादाय पूर्णमेवावशिष्यते ॥
ॐ शान्तिः शान्तिः शान्तिः ॥

Om. That is full; this is full. From fullness comes fullness.
Taking fullness from fullness, fullness remains.
Om. Peace! Peace! Peace!

ईशा वास्यमिदँ सर्वं यत्किञ्च जगत्यां जगत् ।
तेन त्यक्तेन भुञ्जीथा मा गृधः कस्यस्विद्धनम् ॥१॥

All this, whatever exists in this changing universe, should be covered by the Lord. Protect the Self through renunciation. Do not covet the wealth of others.

कुर्वन्नेवेह कर्माणि जिजीविषेच्छतँ समाः ।
एवं त्वयि नान्यथेतोऽस्ति न कर्म लिप्यते नरे ॥२॥

Performing actions in this world, one should desire to live a hundred years. Thus, and not otherwise, will action not bind you, the doer.

असुर्या नाम ते लोका अन्धेन तमसावृताः ।
ताँस्ते प्रेत्याभिगच्छन्ति ये के चात्महनो जनाः ॥३॥

Demonic are those worlds enveloped in blinding darkness, and to them go after death those who are slayers of the Self.

अनेजदेकं मनसो जवीयो नैनद्देवा आप्नुवन्पूर्वमर्षत् ।
तद्धावतोऽन्यानत्येति तिष्ठत्तस्मिन्नपो मातरिश्वा दधाति ॥४॥

The Self is unmoving, one, swifter than the mind. The senses cannot reach It, for It proceeds ahead. Remaining stationary, It outstrips all running. In It, the all-pervading air supports the activities of beings.

तदेजति तन्नैजति तद्दूरे तद्वन्तिके ।
तदन्तरस्य सर्वस्य तदु सर्वस्यास्य बाह्यतः ॥५॥

It moves and It moves not; It is far and It is near; It is within all this and It is also outside all this.

यस्तु सर्वाणि भूतान्यात्मन्येवानुपश्यति ।
सर्वभूतेषु चात्मानं ततो न विजुगुप्सते ॥६॥

He who sees all beings in the Self and the Self in all beings, feels no hatred by virtue of that understanding.

यस्मिन्सर्वाणि भूतान्यात्मैवाभूद्विजानतः ।
तत्र को मोहः कः शोक एकत्वमनुपश्यतः ॥७॥

When, to one who knows, all beings become one with his own Self, how can there be delusion or sorrow for that seer of oneness?

On Knowledge and Wisdom
The Upanishads teach that true knowledge is not merely intellectual understanding but direct experience of the ultimate reality. This experiential knowledge is called "vidya" as opposed to "avidya" (ignorance).

The Isha Upanishad particularly emphasizes the balance between knowledge (vidya) and action (karma). Neither should be pursued exclusively at the expense of the other.

The text warns against the pursuit of either knowledge or action alone:
"Into blind darkness enter those who worship ignorance (avidya);
Into greater darkness enter those who are engaged in knowledge (vidya) alone."

True wisdom comes from understanding the unity underlying the apparent diversity of existence. When one perceives the divine in all beings and all beings in the divine, fear and suffering cease.
